Anatomy of the Somatosensory System
1
FROM WIKIBOOKS
Our somatosensory system consists of sensors in the skin
This is a sample document to
and sensors in our muscles, tendons, and joints. The re-
showcase page-based formatting. It
ceptors in the skin, the so called cutaneous receptors, tell
contains a chapter from aWikibook
usabouttemperature(thermoreceptors),pressureandsur-
calledSensory Systems. None of the
face texture (mechano receptors), and pain (nociceptors).
content has been changed in this
The receptors in muscles and joints provide information
article, but some content has been
about muscle length, muscle tension, and joint angles.
removed.
Cutaneous receptors
Sensory information from Meissner corpuscles and rapidly
adapting afferents leads to adjustment of grip force when
objects are lifted. These afferents respond with a brief
burst of action potentials when objects move a small dis-
tance during the early stages of lifting. In response to
Hairy skin Glabrous skin Figure 1: Receptors in the hu-
man skin: Mechanoreceptors can
Papillary Ridges befreereceptorsorencapsulated.
Examples for free receptors are
the hair receptors at the roots of
Epidermis
Free nerve Merkel’s Septa hairs.Encapsulatedreceptorsare
ending receptor
the Pacinian corpuscles and the
receptors in the glabrous (hair-
less) skin: Meissner corpuscles,
Meissner’s
Sebace go lu ans d corpuscle Dermis Ruffini corpuscles and Merkel’s
Ruffini’s disks.
corpuscle
Hair receptor
Pacinian
corpuscle
1
The following description is based on lecture notes from Laszlo Zaborszky, from Rutgers University.
1
From Wikibooks
Figure 2: Mammalian muscle
spindle showing typical position
in a muscle (left), neuronal con-
nections in spinal cord (middle)
and expanded schematic (right).
The spindle is a stretch receptor
with its own motor supply con-
sisting of several intrafusal mus-
cle fibres. The sensory endings of
aprimary(groupIa)afferentand
a secondary (group II) afferent
coil around the non-contractile
central portions of the intrafusal
fibres.
rapidly adapting afferent activity, muscle force increases
reflexivelyuntilthegrippedobjectnolongermoves.Such
a rapid response to a tactile stimulus is a clear indication
oftheroleplayedbysomatosensoryneuronsinmotorac-
tivity.
The slowly adapting Merkel’s receptors are responsible
forformandtextureperception.Aswouldbeexpectedfor
receptors mediating form perception, Merkel’s receptors
are present at high density in the digits and around the
mouth (50/mm² of skin surface), at lower density in oth-
erglabroussurfaces,andatverylowdensityinhairyskin.
This innervations density shrinks progressively with the
passageoftimesothatbytheageof50,thedensityinhu-
man digits is reduced to 10/mm². Unlike rapidly adapting
axons, slowly adapting fibers respond not only to the ini-
tial indentation of skin, but also to sustained indentation
up to several seconds in duration.
Activation of the rapidly adapting Pacinian corpuscles
gives a feeling of vibration, while the slowly adapting
Ruffini corpuscles respond to the lataral movement or
stretching of skin.
Nociceptors
Nociceptors have free nerve endings. Functionally, skin
nociceptors are either high-threshold mechanoreceptors
2
Anatomy of the Somatosensory System
Rapidly adapting Slowly adapting
Surfacereceptor/ Hair receptor,Meissner’s corpuscle: De- Merkel’s receptor: Used for spa-
small receptive tect an insect or a very fine vibration. tial details, e.g. a round surface
field Used for recognizing texture. edge or “an X” in brail.
Deep receptor / Ruffini’s corpuscle: “A skin
Pacinian corpuscle: “A diffuse vibra-
large receptive stretch”. Used for joint position
tion” e.g. tapping with a pencil.
field in fingers.
Table 1
or polymodal receptors. Polymodal receptors respond not
only to intense mechanical stimuli, but also to heat and
to noxious chemicals. These receptors respond to minute
punctures of the epithelium, with a response magnitude
thatdependsonthedegreeoftissuedeformation.Theyal-
so respond to temperatures in the range of 40–60°C, and
change their response rates as a linear function of warm-
ing(incontrastwiththesaturatingresponsesdisplayedby
non-noxious thermoreceptors at high temperatures).
Pain signals can be separated into individual compo-
Notice how figure captions and
nents, corresponding to different types of nerve fibers
sidenotes are shown in the outside
used for transmitting these signals. The rapidly transmit-
margin (on the left or right, depending
ted signal, which often has high spatial resolution, is
on whether the page is left or right).
called first pain or cutaneous pricking pain. It is well local-
Also, figures are floated to the top/
ized and easily tolerated. The much slower, highly affec-
bottom of the page. Wide content, like
tive component is called second pain or burning pain; it is
the table and Figure 3, intrude into the
poorly localized and poorly tolerated. The third or deep
outside margins.
pain, arising from viscera, musculature and joints, is also
poorly localized, can be chronic and is often associated
with referred pain.
Muscle Spindles
Scatteredthroughoutvirtuallyeverystriatedmuscleinthe
body are long, thin, stretch receptors called muscle spin-
dles.Theyarequitesimpleinprinciple,consistingofafew
smallmusclefiberswithacapsulesurroundingthemiddle
third of the fibers. These fibers are called intrafusal fibers,
incontrasttotheordinaryextrafusalfibers.Theendsofthe
intrafusalfibersareattachedtoextrafusalfibers,sowhen-
ever the muscle is stretched, the intrafusal fibers are also
3
From Wikibooks
Force
control Force (Golgi tendon organ)
signal Inter- Force feedback
neurons
External
forces
Driving Muscle
signal Tendon Muscle force length
Muscle Load
organs
Length (secondary muscle-spindel afferents)
Length error (primary muscle-spindel afferents) Length &
Velocity (primary muscle-spindel afferents) velocity
feedback
Length Spindles
control
signal
Gamma bias
Figure 3: Feedback loops for proprioceptive signals for the perception and control of limb move-
ments. Arrows indicate excitatory connections; filled circles inhibitory connections.
stretched. The central region of each intrafusal fiber has
few myofilaments and is non-contractile, but it does have
oneormoresensoryendingsappliedtoit.Whenthemus-
cle is stretched, the central part of the intrafusal fiber is
stretched and each sensory ending fires impulses.
Muscle spindles also receive a motor innervation. The
For more examples of how to use
large motor neurons that supply extrafusal muscle fibers
HTML and CSS for paper-based
arecalledalphamotorneurons,whilethesmalleronessup-
publishing, seecss4.pub.
plying the contractile portions of intrafusal fibers are
called gamma neurons. Gamma motor neurons can regu-
latethesensitivityofthemusclespindlesothatthissensi-
tivity can be maintained at any given muscle length.
Joint receptors
The joint receptors are low-threshold mechanoreceptors
andhavebeendividedintofourgroups.Theysignaldiffer-
entcharacteristicsofjointfunction(position,movements,
direction and speed of movements). The free receptors or
type 4 joint receptors are nociceptors.
4
